--
title: on writing and drawing
author: cloudhead
date: 15/03/2010

As an artist and occasional writer, I often wonder about what makes a craft. It's in our interest to understand the process and idiosyncrasies involved, to get better at what we do, and to be able to 'hack' the process when necessary. This first article is an attempt at covering some ground on what, to me, are some of the more interesting elements of the mediums we choose to create with. It's a start, and by no means covers the full extent of my thoughts, but it's what I've managed to formulate so far. I chose to start with writing and drawing, because I am most familiar with these.

We see them as distinct things, apart from being vehicles for your thoughts, they have nothing in common. It also seems very hard to define exactly what drawing or writing is. What are the elements which make up these crafts? What do you have to deal with when writing a story, or illustrating a landscape? What is the process? What does the artist go through?  People are very reluctant to compare different forms, "It's just not the same thing", but _my_ interest lies in finding patterns in things where you would typically not think there are any.

So how do we break down a form? I'm going to try to dissect the forms mentioned by observation:

Writing's biggest trait is its continuity. That is, it has a beginning and an end. Where a drawing merely represents a moment, writing happens in time. The only way drawing can mimic this is through multiplicity, but we'll deal with that another time. The other trait of writing is its very unique impact on each reader, because what you are transmitting must first be interpreted before being experienced, and meaning is imperfect knowledge. We can only transmit it through other vehicles, such as spoken and written word. It doesn't have a concrete representation and for that reason, I consider writing to be a _2nd degree form_.

How about the process of writing? Writing is sort of all or nothing. It is a form which I don't consider very _granular_, meaning the smallest elements of expression you can work with aren't that small. Even a single word might have too much meaning or carry baggage you don't want. These are the things you have to deal with when writing. I think of it as assembling trivial meaning into greater meaning. Sentences have a very rigid structure, you can't just put any words in them in any order. They often have to be rewritten to accommodate new words, while respecting grammar. Poetry offers a way to break out of this. It gives the author more control, at the expense of being more abstract.

Writing cannot be experienced through the senses. You might appreciate typography by looking at font characters, but unless you read the words and know what they mean, you won't get to experience anything. This is one of the reasons why I think it is harder to find flaws in your own writing. Your analytic brain is too tightly coupled with the language you use in writing. The other reason is that writing isn't the representation of anything concrete. There is nothing to compare it to. Writing is abstract. It doesn't exist in a meaningful way outside of our minds. Structured thought is not to be found in nature. Writing is something you imagine in your head, it is experienced through thought. Words are only there to trigger those thoughts, sometimes combinations of thoughts which have never been experienced before.  That is where the power lies.

Drawing is the artists interpretation of the world. Notice that in the case of writing, the reader's interpretation is most important. Drawing is a _1st degree form_. Drawing is about seeing things as they truly are, not how they appear to be. We tend to see things the way they make the most sense to us. I bet that if mice could draw, they would draw us with huge feet, because that is their perspective on the world. Drawing is in a way, the flip side of writing. It is not tied to language or interpretation. It just is. When you draw a chair, you must forget everything you know about chairs, and just think about the different shapes which form it. Language is a dangerous tool, because it closes us in a symbolic world. By putting words on to meaning, we lose the ability to see meaning. When you look at a chair, what you see is not the chair, but the meaning you created for the word 'chair'. So drawing is about unlearning a lot of things.

Obviously, there are many more things to be said about these forms -- I mostly talked about the elements which these crafts are made of. In the future, I'd like to delve into the mental process involved.